title, leaving the legislature. 1983
was a turnaround year in many ways. The family had
been instrumental in starting a bank in College
Station. We had oil and gas revenue on our land out
in the country. and I was still chairman of the
House Appropriations Committee under a new
speaker.
I had not given serious consideration to leaving
the legislature until I was approached by the A&M
System Board of Regents about becoming their
executive secretary and would be the legislative
liaison to the legislature. The more I thought
about it, the more sense that it made. I had always
worked in the best interest of the system and
enjoyed my relationship with the legislature.
There was also the possibility that the oil and gas
revenue would suddenly dry up. and would again put
finances in a pretty tight situation. In
addition, I had served five terms as chairman of
the House Appropriations Committee and began to
grow somewhat weary of the
position as it required a new training program
each time because there was about a 50% turnover in
membership in the committee each session.
Committee members that were served on the
Appropriations Committee were often tapped in
the next session to serve as committee chairman
and were then therefore removed from their
position as a member of the Appropriations
Committee. Discussions with the Board of Regents
began in earnest following the regular session of
the legislature in 1983. By late 1983, I had made
a decision to leave the legislature and
accept a position with the Secretary of the Board
should the Board of Regents choose to elect me. On
or about the first of November, I announced that I
would not be a candidate for re-election. Later
that month, when the Board of Regents met, they
tentatively approved my appointment as
Executive Secretary of the Board. It was not
finally approved until the meeting in January
about
the same date that I assumed the position upon
resigning from the legislature. It is my
understanding that at the very last minute before
the board acted upon the minute order in November
that a concession was made to the Chancellor to
make it a dual position, that is, Executive
Secretary of the Board of Regents and Vice
Chancellor for State Affairs. By doing it this
way, the Chancellor felt like that I would become a
part of his staff and he would have more of a role in
legislative affairs. I never viewed it as any
other way except that the Chancellor would play a
very significant role in legislative affairs and
could see no reason why the dual role would not work
very well since it would really not change
anything as far as I was concerned.
Shortly after my appointment it was suggested
that I have an office in the chancellor's suite,
but I declined and suggested I would prefer not to
do that. I felt like I could operate more
efficiently out of one office as opposed to two
offices. During the time I was in the legislature,
I operated out of about three or four offices and
found it rather inefficient to do so, although
there was nothing that I could be done about that
arrangement while I was in the legislature. Other
than the one conversation regarding the
suggestion that I have an office in the
chancellor's suite, the issue never came up again
until many years later. A resignation effective
on January the 15th, 1984, forced the then
Governor White to call a special election for my
replacement. At that time, there was a need for a
special session dealing with public school
finance, sometime during 1984. The election was
called for during
the spring break of March of 1984 and the fact that
it was called during the spring break became a
major issue in the campaign. I do not know whether
the governor had any knowledge of when spring
break was and the fact that the students would be
out of town. But it certainly made for an issue that
fired up the student body in the general election
in November later that year. And as a result, it
reversed the election results in November when
the two candidates squared off for the second
time. 1984 is remembered for some other reasons in
addition to those already mentioned. Earlier in
1984, there was to be a constitutional election on
a proposition referred to as Proposition No. 2.
This proposition would restructure the
permanent university fund and would dedicate
$200 million through the higher education
assistance fund. The higher education
assistance fund would be funded through general
revenue appropriations that would be
automatically funded from the top, so to speak,
each time the legislature met. You will recall
that the schools outside of the Permanent
University Fund that did not share in the
Permanent University Fund had previously shared
in the 10-cent ad valorem tax that was assessed
throughout
the state and was about to be ruled
unconstitutional. The pure passage of
Proposition 2, the Council of Governing Boards
became very active. The Council of Governing
Boards was made up of the chairman of the governing
boards of the institutions of higher education
that were state supported. In the case of Texas
A&M, This would have normally been H.R. Bumbright
of Dallas, but he requested that Mr. Joe
Richardson of Amarillo serve in his stead on the
board. This was honored, and Mr. Richardson in
turn asked me to attend all the meetings and become
involved in advising them. with regards to how to
get Proposition 2 passed. Proposition 2 did pass
in November and become a part of our Constitution,
thereby making some changes in the Permanent
University Fund by bringing several schools
under the fund that had not previously been
there and dedicating $200 million to the Higher
Education Assistance Fund to take care of the
schools that were not covered by the Permanent
University Fund. Generally speaking, the
Permanent University Fund covered those schools
that were in the University of Texas system and the
Texas A&M University system. However, we have to
be very careful to point out that this did not cover
future schools that might come into the system,
something that we'll talk about later when the
South Texas schools became desires to enter
either the A&M system or the University of Texas
system. 1984, the state of Texas experienced a
downturn in its economic situation. This had a
direct impact on the revenues that were to come to
the state to fund state government. On making
certain projections, Governor Mark White came to
the conclusion that state agencies would have to
reduce their budgets by some 13% in general
revenue. Otherwise, the state would be floating
in red ink somewhere in the future, sometime in the
future. The governor did not have the authority to
force a 13% reduction or any reduction for that
matter. All he could do was simply ask that it be
done. Only the legislature could have enforced a
reduction in the budgets of state government. The
records will probably show that most agencies and
institutions gave up very little and did not reach
the 13% goal that the governor had in mind. For
example, Texas A&M did better than average by
giving up some 9%, all of this being in reduced
utility costs, which could not be spent for
anything else the way the appropriations bill is
written anyway. The elections were adequate
enough, though, to forestall a crisis between the
time that the governor issued the executive order
and the legislature was back in session in 1985.
Although a crisis was forestalled, another
crisis was looming for higher education with
regards to state appropriations. Legislative
Budget Board meets in the fall prior to the session
of the legislature convening and writes a
proposed budget. And these budget numbers
usually reflect an expenditure of funds that are
available and allows little room for changes
during the legislative session. In the year of the
fiscal crisis, it was anticipated that most of the
funds would be spent
prior to the at least in the recommendations of the
budget board prior to the session beginning.
State agencies generally fared pretty well in the
recommendations of the budget board until it came
down to making appropriations for higher
education. When those appropriations were made,
it was required that a 27% reduction be made in
general revenue for institutions of higher
education. This was a much greater cut than state
agencies had experienced and was a far greater cut
than reduction in appropriations than any state
agency or university had ever experienced in
modern times. This sent shockwaves across the
nation with regards to the terrible plight of
Texas and Texas higher education.
caused me to start reflecting on what might occur
during the session once the legislature convened
in January of 1985. There were two reasons for the
27% reduction for higher education on that
fateful day in December 1984 by the Legislative
Budget Board. First is that it's the last major
article in the appropriations bill to be
considered. Therefore, it is. necessary that the
recommendations by the staff be a balanced budget
and any balancing that has to be done has to be done
at the end of the appropriations process by the
legislative budget board and its staff. Second
and more important Concern and reason is that 84%
of the budget is mandated either by statute,
federal mandate, or by court order, leaving only
16% of the budget that is not mandated. 16% is
significant until you consider the fact that
virtually all of the non-mandated
appropriations is in higher education. To
compound the of
major concern was the fact that most legislators
were not aware that such recommendations would be
forthcoming once they convened in Austin and the
appropriations recommendations were laid out.
This lack of awareness concern to me about as much
as anything else. When I considered the people
that would be the key players in the
appropriations process, I could predict as
anyone could who the major players would be in the
Senate and in the House with the exception of the
person that served as Chairman of Budget and
Oversight in the House Higher Education
Committee and would serve on the Appropriations
Committee as a member of the Budget, Chairman of
the Budget and Oversight from Higher Education.
This is the person that you look to to be the one to
champion higher education.
This became critically important when you
consider the budget reductions that were going to
be in the recommendations of the budget board.
When I considered the possibilities whom I could
fill that role since the position would be someone
new. I
could only come up with one person that had the
knowledge and the savvy of the legislative
operations and the courage to sit
with the chairman of the Appropriations
Committee and to stand up to the Speaker and say
that higher education should not be mistreated.
The next question, and more importantly, was how
we could get the Speaker of the House to make such an
appointment. It occurred to me that there was one
person that could influence the speaker more than
anyone else in the whole state of Texas. He
happened to be a graduate of Texas A&M and was a
close friend of the chancellor of Texas A&M
University's system. So I asked the chancellor if
he would call this individual. and urge him to
contact the Speaker and urge the Speaker to make
the appointment of this individual to the
Chairman of Budget and Oversight for Higher
Education.
The appointment was made by the Speaker, much to
our delight, and it wasn't until months later that
it was confirmed that the appointment was made
because of the phone calls that were made.
Confirmed one day about midway in the session when
the Speaker of the House stopped me in the hallway
and said, you Aggies really play tough. And I knew
exactly what he had reference to when he made that
statement. He said, I know what happened. And he
said, I just want you to know you Aggies sure do play
tough. With a champion of higher education in a key
slot, we were able to restore all but about 9% or 10%
of the budget reductions that had been made by the
recommended, at least by the Legislative Budget
Board. The restoration of these funds to the
extent that they were made was
due to the effort of many, but it was very critical
to have someone sitting on the committee that
could not only relate
to the chairman of the Appropriations Committee
and the speaker, but was willing to stand up to them
when the time came. Efforts were monumental on the
part of the chairman of the Board of Regents of the
University of Texas System who held a series of
meetings in the evenings to rally support and to
tell our story to the members of the legislature. I
was invited to attend each and every one of those
meetings and They were extremely effective and
could not have been handled better than the
chairman of the UT Board of Regents was able to
handle them.
To address the fiscal crisis, one of the
approaches that was used to try to restore some
physical integrity to higher education was to
prepare alternative proposals for higher
education.
It became the University of Texas system's role to
prepare these alternative proposals and take
them to the key people in the legislature that were
writing the higher education budget and tried to
sell them on the IIDF. This set a pattern for years
to come of the University of Texas preparing
alternative proposals that would be to deal with
all of higher education as a package as opposed to
each institution going in and making a plea
individually with regards to its
appropriations. One of the problems and
challenges that I always had to deal with when
these proposals came forward before they were
taken to members of the legislature, was trying to
reconcile the appropriations for our A&M
services, our agencies. The University of Texas
system did not understand our agencies and were
not that concerned and had difficulty in
proposing
what I considered a
bare budget for these agencies. Each time we were
successful in getting the University of Texas
system to reconsider their proposal and add funds
to the agencies' budgets prior to submitting them
to members of the legislature. There were other
distractions that we had to deal with in early 1985
when the session of the legislature was well
underway. It caused great concern. was the
Comptroller of Public Accounts pronouncing that
higher education had a $2 billion gravy bowl of
funds that it could spend to make up the deficit
that we contended that would exist if we did not get
more general revenue appropriations. It took
some time and effort to convince members of the
legislature that the Comptroller was not on
target in suggesting these funds could be spent in
such a manner. These funds were out of special
funds, special appropriations, or special
grants that had been made to universities for
scholarships and for various and other sundry
purposes. programs and could not be diverted to
general revenue appropriations to take care of
operating budgets of universities. Another
funding issue was to get implemented the changes
brought about by Proposition 2 that had been made a
part of the Texas Constitution. There were
several issues that called for additional
expenditure of general revenue funds in
Proposition 2. First and foremost was a $200
million appropriation that would go to the
schools outside of the permanent university
fund, and this was called the Higher Education
Assistance Fund. These funds had to be set aside
out of the general revenue appropriation's prior
to any operating budgets being allocated funds.
In addition, some other changes that were made in
Proposition 2 dealt with the allocation of
additional funds to Prairie View. $6 million each
year for the next 10 years to come from the
University of Texas System's portion of the
Permanent University Fund, and with A&M
providing an equitable portion. That was in 1985
when it became... first became law as a part of the
Constitution. And since then, University of
Texas has completed its obligation of providing
$6 million for 10 years. But to my knowledge, we
still have not clearly defined what is an
equitable portion for Prairie View. The other
changes that were made was the addition of other
schools under the permanent university fund. In
the case of the Texas A&M University system, we
were adding the Texas A&M University at
Galveston. It also made a change with regards to
allocation of funds to our agencies in the Texas
A&M University system. In the past, the A&M
agencies had to get legislative approval to sell
bonds and use bond proceeds for construction at
facilities other than on the A&M campus at College
Station. This proposition changed that where the
allocation and approval could be made by the A&M
System Board of Regents.
A final change brought about by Proposition 2 in
1984 was providing access of the system offices of
the Texas A&M University System and the
University of Texas System to the available
university fund
for their operational expenses. This provision
in the proposition has obviously led to a decline
in the availability of general revenue
appropriations by the legislature to the system
offices. Since proposition to system offices of
A&M and the University of Texas system have
received only a token amount of general revenue
appropriations from the legislature. Mentioned
before 1985, the legislative session presented
some very difficult times for higher education
because of the budgetary cuts going into the
session and coming out of the session with still
about a nine percent reduction in general revenue
appropriations for higher education. The
actions that was taken by the Texas A&M University
System Board of Regents to alleviate some of the
problem, particularly on the main campus of Texas
A&M University, was to refund
most of the bonds that had been previously funded
at higher rates.
than the interest rates that were prevailing in
1985 and 1986. Refunding these bonds, about $50
million was freed up for one-time funding by the
Texas A&M University System Board of Regents. The
regent chiefly responsible for this idea and
concept was the chairman of the board of regents at
that time, David Eller. Chairman Eller had an
excellent grasp of bond financing and was able to
walk through with the other regents the
complexities of refunding the bonds and how this
was advantageous to the Texas A&M University
system. In 1987, when the legislature convened
that January, the
leadership in the legislature and in the
governor's office remained the same. Jim Lewis
was still speaker. Bill Hobby was the lieutenant
governor. Grant Jones chaired the Senate Finance
Committee and Jim Rudd was chairman of the House
Appropriations Committee.
State Representative Tom Muher was still the
chairman of Budget and Oversight and sat on the
Appropriations Committee representing higher
education. There were several issues that arose
during the session that were not contemplated
prior to the session convening. Early in the
session, I was contacted by State Representative
Eddie Cavazos, who represented the Corpus
Christi area.
And he advised me that he would like to see Corpus
Christi state university
become a part of the Texas A&M University system.
I suspect that Representative Cavazos'
ulterior motive was to make Corpus Christi State
University a four-year institution. At that
time, it was an upper-level institution and had
only juniors, seniors, and graduate students.
Apparently Representative Cavazos was talking
to the University of Texas system at the same time
and had been promised through that system's
chairman of the Board of Regents that he would see
to it that a new institution was created in South
Texas to alleviate the lack of higher education in
the South Texas area. Cavazos
seemed to like this idea, and I
had little contact with him after the University
of Texas board chairman intervened. At that time,
the Texas A&M University system was not taking an
aggressive position with regards to bringing
Corpus Christi State University into the Texas
A&M University system.
Cavazos introduced a resolution that called for
the University of Texas to do an interim study to
determine the need for a new university in the
South Texas area. The resolution, when it reached
the Senate, was handled by the Corpus Christi
Senator, Carlos Trujan. Senator Trujan, being a
friend personally and a friend of Texas A&M,
contacted me and suggested that he wish to add the
Texas A&M University System to the resolution
and create a joint committee of the House and
Senate that would use the resources of the
University of Texas System and the Texas A&M
University System to make the study to determine
the needs for higher education in South Texas.
This version passed by the Senate was accepted by
the House and became the final version of the
resolution creating the joint committee to study
higher education in South Texas. I will have much
more to say about the interim study at a later time.
but first to complete the issues that were brought
before the 1987 legislative session. Prior to
1987, a select committee on higher education
chaired by Mr. Larry Temple, who was a former press
agent for President Johnson, and chairman of the
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board, had
completed its work and submitted its
recommendations in the form of a comprehensive
bill that was before the legislature. There were
several positive aspects with regards to the bill
that the select committee had drawn up and
introduced in the session that is having a lasting
impact is the drafting of the General
Appropriations Act in such a way that higher
education is virtually veto-proof. In the past,
one of the favorite veto items of the governor was
special items in higher education. 1987, with the
passage of the recommendations of the Select
Committee on Higher Education, these items are
now veto proof. item that caused some concern
within the Texas A&M University system dealt with
the handling of indirect costs from federal
projects, primarily research projects. Past
practice of the legislature in handling indirect
costs through the appropriations process was to
capture those costs
from universities and bring them into the
appropriations process. This, in effect, did not
allow the universities to retain any of the
indirect costs that were received on federal
grants and federal projects. On the other hand,
the agencies within the Texas A&M University
system were allowed to retain 100% of their
indirect costs.
That is, they were not captured by the
appropriations process and freed up those funds
for whatever use the agencies
wished to make. It was advantageous to the
agencies in two respects. Number one, it meant
that they had more funds to work with, and number
two, they had more flexibility with the indirect
cost funds than they had with general revenue
appropriations. The Select Committee on Higher
Education had recommended that universities be
allowed to retain 50% of the indirect costs on
federal grants. In drafting the bill, however,
they used the language, quote, institutions of
higher education, close quote, were to retain 50%
of their indirect costs that they recovered from
federal projects.
I was unable to get the language changed so that our
state agencies were not included in that
particular definition where the term
institutions of higher education was used.
In the Senate, however, I was able to prevail upon
Senator Chad Edwards to change that particular
wording to general academic and health science
institutions. This clearly excluded the state
agencies at the Texas A&M University system from
losing 50% of their indirect costs. One of the
concerns was discussing this issue in public view
because of the misunderstanding that would
likely prevail. When the conference committee
was deliberating on the bill, I was called back to
the Lieutenant Governor's office in a private
meeting with three or four people from higher
education, instructed by the Lieutenant
Governor that the last few issues were to be
resolved before we left the room. As more and more
of the issues were resolved, members of higher
education began to drift away from the table until
the only ones left was the representative of the
University of Texas system and myself. We waited
until that time to explain why we wanted the
language to read general academic and health
science institutions. at the University of Texas
System representatives to agree to use that
language and as a result we never had to explain it
to the legislature as a whole or to even individual
members of the legislature other than Senator
Edwards. Discussed it with the sponsor in the
house but was unable to prevail upon him to make the
change and for that reason we found ourselves in
conference committee with the house version
relating to 50% retention of indirect costs for
institutions of higher education which would
include the A&M agencies or services, the Senate
version being silent with regards to the A&M
services or agencies, which was the preferred
language as far as the A&M system was concerned.
Our strategy of avoiding making it a public issue
with regards to the A&M services I think has paid
great dividends over the years. A final issue that
the 1987 regular session of the Texas legislature
dealt
with was
related to the Texas A&M University at Galveston.
This was a bill introduced by Senator Chet Brooks,
who was a ranking senator and on the conference
committee of the General Appropriations Act. At
the time, the bill was moving through the
legislature.
Although I was never told this, I'm sure that the
bill was introduced by Senator Brooks at the
request of the president of Texas A&M University
at Galveston,
who had a reputation of bypassing the system
office and the Board of Regents when he wished to
accomplish something through the legislature.
Fortunately, once Senator Brooks had filed the
bill in the Senate, I got a call from his office
requesting that I come by and look over the bill and
see if I had any changes that I wished to make. Since
the bill had been filed, this meant that a complete
substitute would be written
and taken to committee, Senate committee, if
there were any changes that needed to be made. The
bill as drawn, in my opinion, would have taken
Texas A&M University Galveston from under the
control of Texas A&M University. As Secretary of
the Board of Regents, I was aware of the fact that
the Board did not want to see that happen, and if
anything, wanted to bring it more under control of
Texas A&M University. I seriously doubted that
the bill would pass, since it was introduced very
late in the session, but we did not want to take any
chances.
I was allowed to rewrite the bill in such a way that
it came even more under control of Texas A&M
University and was able to also consult with the
president-to-be of Texas A&M University,
Galveston, who at the time was living in
Washington, D.C. It was not surprising because of
the seniority of Senator Brooks that the bill
passed in the Senate.
Surprising, however, that the
state representative representing the
Galveston area was able to pass it in the House very
quickly and the bill became law.